Okay. Ready for almost our last talk. Again, this is the kernel development room. Nobody
got lost, hopefully, here. Our next talk is by Nick about limitations in the available
file system calls.
Okay. Now it works. Okay. Great. Thank you. Okay. So, hello. Thanks for having me here.
Nick, I work at FORF. It's a research center in Greece, and I mainly do prototype bring-up.
So, they give me boards and chips, and I make them boot Linux. We mostly work on RISC-5
prototypes these days, and this is one of the projects I'm working on with the teams
to bring RISC-5 to the cloud server region. So, I've played with the kernel. I have some
driver experience. I've contributed here and there, but I'm totally clueless when it comes
to file systems. So, while working on this project, I wanted to take a backup of my home
folder, and I wanted to preserve as much as possible. And also, I had another use case
when I wanted to take a backup of a really large media library we have in our radio
station, our open source radio station in Crete, in the university. So, I tried, I was
looking at the available programs out there like copy, r-sync, and stuff, and I sort of
wondered what would it take to implement such a thing with the current APIs available in
the kernel. And so, let's begin with what it takes, what it means to copy a file. First,
you have to preserve the file data. You need to do this in an efficient way, and you do
not want the files to be larger when you copy them to the destination, or you want to be
also space and time efficient. And you also need to preserve file metadata, and file metadata
is, again, the permission bits, like retry, execute for group and users and others, the
ownership, like a user and group IDs, the timestamps, and there are some old school attributes
which basically 32-bit mask used for tracking some attributes that were used to be file system
specific, and then you have the extended attributes, which is a list of key value pairs that you
can use. So, let's see what we have to the available API we have for that. For copying
data, okay, you can, we have the naive approach, you can just open the source and destination,
read from one copy to write to the other, and then close them, but this is not very efficient
because you have to copy data to user space from kernel and then copy them back. So, you
have send file, which is a more efficient way of doing this. This is a system called
that's, so read, write, it's the most portable way, everyone has this. Send file is Linux
and free BSD. So, what you do with send file is you have to file descriptors, and then you
give them to the kernel, and kernel does the copying for you, so you don't have to read,
move stuff to the user space and back. And then we have a new system called that's Linux only,
and it's supposed to be the most efficient of all. It's called copy file range, and it's,
it, it's the goal of the system called is to also take into account file system optimizations like
copy and write, like, refling, like for example, when you want to copy two files on a server,
on an NFS server, then the, instead of bringing them to the client, do the copy and send them back,
you tell the server to do it for you. So, this new system called is, aims to do all sorts of
optimizations for you, and from what I've read, they also want to do optimizations at the block
level. For example, NVMe has this operation where you tell the controller to copy blocks for you,
instead of doing it from the CPU. So, they aim to take advantage of these things as well,
and this aims to be the new API for copying files. It doesn't work across file systems, it works,
it has some limitations on how, where you can use them, but it's pretty cool. And it's, when we
copy files, we not only want to copy the data, we only also want to preserve the holes, because I
mentioned we want to be efficient in space as well. So, what this, this is, is some files that,
for example, you have a large set of zeros, instead of storing them in the disk, you just truncate
the file, and the file system driver will bring you back zeros, but you won't, you won't waste any,
any space on the disk for that. And you have a L6 system call for that, so you seek for the next
chunk, and then for the next hole, and you truncate. So, you want this, you want to do this for
preserving holes, and not have the file growing when you move it. So, that's for preserving data.
How do we preserve metadata? Okay, you have CHMOD for the permission bits, it's a, you have,
you can have CHMOD, or the family of system calls, and you have CHMOD at, which takes an
opath descriptor, which is very useful, I'm going to come back to that. You can use CHMOD for the
ownership, and you have UTIM and S for ATIM and MTIM. So, two of the timestamps we have
for the old style 32-bit attributes, there is an IOCTL, which is not portable. This is a set of
FS flags, that some of them are file system specific, so it's not that you can preserve them
while copying from one file system to the other, it won't make any sense to have the same flags,
some, some of these flags do not make any sense for other file systems. There are some flags that
are common between all file systems, like the immune, the immutable flag, or the append flag,
which tells you that you are only able to append to this file, or that the immutable flag tells
you that you are not able to do anything with it, even the root cannot do anything with it.
Pretty useful for backups, for example, when you take the backup, you can mark the file as immutable,
and then if some, for some reason, someone's doing RF minus RF, it will not delete the file,
it will not be able to change it. So, but the IOCTL is not portable, it's a hackish way of doing it,
it's a long way of doing it, so now we have the extended attributes, which is a better API
for having attributes to the, adding attributes to the files, and this is used for all sorts of things.
It's used for storing capabilities, it's used for security modules like SELinux, AppArmors, Mac,
you can use it for access control lists, X4 uses this to store data in the iNode,
it's crazy, I mean it's a huge list of extended attributes out there, there is even a configuration
file where it gives you like a filter on which attributes you can preserve between file system
and stuff, and honestly there is not a central place where you can get documentation on this,
you have to look, find your way around it, so this is the way of preserving extended attributes, so
let's see some problems so far. So, copy file range, as the man page says, may expand
whole holes on sparse files, so this system called that's meant to be, you know, the whole
source of optimizations when copying, like taking into account various file system and block level,
even block level optimizations will expand holes, so you need, you can use this for copying chunks
of files because you need to copy a chunk, do truncate and then the next chunk, so you cannot
use it like to copy the whole file and forget about it, this also makes it, this both the
instant file and copy file range, there are no IO hearing ops for that, so for example,
if I want to copy a whole directory and I could do a batch of system calls in IO hearing for every
file and then let the kernel copy the directory and come back when it finishes, I cannot do that,
we have IO, you have IO hearing ops for read and write and the others, and even we even have IO
hearing ops for the extended attribute system calls, but not for sent file or copy range, if copy
file range didn't expand the holes and we could have an IO hearing op for copy file range, it could
be great because we could just put it there and it will copy, it would be much better for, you
know, copying batch of files, we would have to do system calls all the time for seeking and truncating
and I mean it's meant to be the optimal solution, the other problem is that the opath descriptors,
the op variants of these system calls, they take, instead of having the whole path string,
you give a descriptor which is an opath descriptors which describes points to the directory, let's say,
to the path, this is very useful because you don't have to, so you don't have to carry the
string of the path all the time and it's more safe for multi-threading because for example,
if you change directory while you're doing stuff, things will be messed up, so it's better to use
opath file descriptors, opath descriptors, you get those from open app, you get from open,
open gives you these types of descriptors that are very useful, but we don't have ad system
calls for extended attributes, so we do have for everything else, but there are no ad variants
for the extended attribute system calls, which it's a bit messy because you can use this for the
rest of your process, like for copying files, for changing, for u-times, for changing the timestamps,
but not for chmod, for cho, but we don't have it for extended attributes.
You mean with opath file descriptors? Yes, I think that doesn't work, but we do have
fsetx, adderat, and fgetx, adderat. We don't have it at, no.
I mean you can't look up, yes they only operate on a specific fd, but I mean...
No, no, no, for example, for chmod and cho, in u-times, then you all have ad variants,
you can use opath descriptors. We don't have ad variants, sure, but I should probably...
Yeah, you can do some tricks with proc self and get file descriptors from there and resolve the
path, but it would make much more sense to have ad variants for those system calls as well.
We didn't have chmod ad, but that got fixed on 6.6 with the chmod.2 system call, so now this is
covered, and something else that's weird is that the u-times and ad allows an empty path flag,
but it's not in the man page, so we need to update the man page for that.
So that's one thing, it would be great if we had system call variants for the extended attributes.
It would also make sense instead of having to use ioctl for the old school attributes to have a
more portable way of playing with them, so maybe if we could use, if we could wrap them around an
extended attribute, it would be better, I guess, because we wouldn't have to resort to ioctl,
we could have a portable, like have one attribute for immutable, one flag, or one attribute for no
dump that map to the old school bitmux, so that we have one API for all attributes, the old ones
and the new ones, which is portable and not ioctl, and by the way with ioctl you cannot use
opath descriptor, so that would be better. Another thing that I told you about before is that for
the extended attributes, I couldn't really find documentation in one place, I had to look over
the place and there are some of them that are not documented in the kernel, they're documented elsewhere,
so it would be great if we had documentation for all the extended attributes the kernel
understands and the permissions required for accessing them, because there are, for example,
security and trusted namespaces that you can only access when you have the DAC admin and going,
this is the next part, and you have some others that you need for security capabilities, you
need setcap, for example, so it would be great if we had documentation for all the extended
attributes out there and how you can set them, what do they do, so in terms of capabilities,
when you do a backup, you probably need a couple of accurate search so that you can read the
source hierarchy without being the owner of the files that you're copying, if you want to make copy
special files like devices, you probably need cup and k-node, chown for doing, for changing the
ownership after you've copied the file, you probably want, you want for again cup of owner to be able
to set the timestamps and most of the extended attributes in order to set the immutable and the
append attribute, the old style attribute, you need the Linux immutable capability,
so what I want to point out here is that this is a bit inconsistent, for example, we have
a capability for one attribute for the append and the immutable, and then we have another capability
for the capabilities for an extended attribute, and then for two families of extended attributes,
we have Capsis admin, which is an overkill, we don't want to use Capsis admin, so it would be,
it would be nice if we discuss this a bit, like how should we arrange capabilities, how should we,
how should we, maybe we should introduce more capabilities or review how these are being used,
obviously we cannot, I mean break backwards compatibility, but it would be nice if we had that,
I mean this goes also into discussion regarding documentation, like we could have a documentation
or what you could do with this attribute, which capability you need to play with it,
and what it does, so it would be, it would be helpful to have that, and then we could discuss
how we could break Cic admin or how other capabilities we could introduce for maybe other
special attributes, like for, I don't know, ACLs or something. So another discussion,
when do backup file, let's say that we have done already a backup, and now we want to update it,
first thing you do is like you check modification times, okay, you can see with them, with them time
from one and the other, and make sure that if they're not the same, then the contents of the file
have changed. M time only tracks the modification of the contents of the file, if you changed
anything related to metadata, if you changed permissions, if you added an extended attribute
or replaced an extended attribute, then you, M time will not catch this, C time will catch this,
which is the last change attribute, but unfortunately you cannot preserve C time, so when you copy
the file for the first time, the creation time, the change time on the backup, it wouldn't be the
same as the source, so when the source C time changes, you cannot compare it with a backup.
So it would be useful, and so maybe it changed a bit later, maybe, I don't know,
you cannot compare them because they are in a different system, different time zones, I don't
know, and you have no control over that. So if metadata changes in a file, you have to read
them all and compare them by hand, so for example, if I add an extended attribute, I have to read
all the extended attributes of the source, all the extended attributes of the target,
and then see if something changed, because I cannot rely on C time, because I cannot preserve C time.
So some tools, I mean, are synced, checks for M time, and if you want to be more safe, it uses
CRC, CRC is unreliable, it's not secure, it says for security, but you can make your way through,
you can change the file and preserve the checksum by adding some extra stuff afterwards.
Shall be better, both these approaches are not nice because you need to read the whole file
both on the source and the target and compare. We could use measurements from IMA, but we cannot
expose those, we cannot transfer them through NFS, so if we are copying files from the NFS,
NFS server and copying them locally, you cannot get the measurements on the server.
There were some discussion around this, there were some patches, they were rejected,
because I don't know there were some licensing issues, like IMA's, GPL, and NFS is different,
they couldn't standardize this, so they could do an RFC call, whatever. So if we have measurements,
we cannot expose them, I mean, even if I, like, so if we had, we could, I could at least compare them
and make sure that the file contents were the same or changed, because M time is not reliable,
I mean, if someone changes the file, they can reset M time, and I may not take a backup of it and
leave any secure copy there. So we have a problem there, and I suggest that one approach to this
problem, okay, obviously if we could expose IMA measurements through NFS, that would be the most
appropriate way, because we could have, like, secure trusted hashes that we could use, but
one way of doing it is if we could preserve C time, if we could preserve C time, when we copied
the time, the file for the first time, we could have the same C time on the backup and the source,
so if the C time changed in the source, we would, we could check it with the backup, we would know
that something changed not only in the contents, like in the case of M time, but also in metadata,
so we could use this to skip the file if something didn't change, instead of having to
check all the metadata and compare and then skip, and also because when M time changes,
C time also changes, if someone tampered with M time, if someone tampered with the data and then
reset M time, because C time would change, we could also catch this. There is no API for doing that,
and the reason is, there are various reasons, but the most obvious one is, like, there's a
chicken and egg issue, like when you set the C time, because the C time tracks the changes of,
any change you do to the I, no, it would need to update itself, so it will change the C time again,
so if you set it in the past, for example, and when you do the change then it would need to be
updated to indicate that it changes itself, so there's, I mean, semantically it's a bit of an issue,
it's not another issue that when the C time is in a remote system and you try to change it
locally, it wouldn't work, if you give the command, let's say, to change it, it wouldn't work, because
on NFS the server tracks C time differently, so it's not that easy, and there is this discussion
about C time, okay, C time currently is only maintained by the kernel, there is no API not
even for the root, and there is this notion that this could be used for forensics, like for tracking,
like malicious modifications to the file, but if someone is privileged then it can do other
things as well, it can change C time by modifying the system time, which already, there are already
programs out there that do this for you, or you can just open the file system, change the date on
the file system and come back, and you can even do this without crashing the whole thing, because
now we have FS freeze, and I tried it, it works, so I believe that since this is currently, it's
doable, people can't tamper with C time, privileged users, I suggest that we have an API for doing
this in the proper way, not in a hackish way, and maybe with a new capability for that,
it's the same way that we have a capability for immutable, let's have another capability for
C time, and I don't know, change U time, and so my introduction, another system call for that.
I was thinking of birth time or creation time, like should I preserve that as well,
and I didn't really find a use case for it, there are programs that already create, remove the file
and create a new one, like Vi does, so this timestamp doesn't say much, but there were
some discussions like this, there is a Windows, like in Samba, there are similar timestamps
for another operating system that tell you where the file was created in the first place,
and yes, that's why they added this, maybe we could have, instead of trying to preserve this,
which is an immutable timestamp, maybe we could have like a common standardized extended
attribute that we could carry around, I don't know, we could obviously have timestamp inside
the file, but not all file formats support this, and then final, how do we back up encrypted files?
So with eCryptFS, you could just copy everything as is, because the metadata and everything needed
to decrypt the file is in the file itself, and then you also copy the configuration like the
eCryptFS, which contains the wrapped key and stuff, but if you encrypted the files with Fscript,
which is the new way of doing things, you cannot back them up, you could use, you could figure
out if a file or a directory is encrypted, you cannot figure this out for a sim link, because
in order to take this, you need to do an IOCTL, so IOCTLs don't operate on no path descriptors,
and currently there is no API to copy, to back up files encrypted with Fscript,
the only way of doing is to decrypt them first, and copy them and then re-crypt them,
but this beats the purpose of having them in an encrypted form in the first place, if in order
to do a back up, I need to re- decrypt them then, there is a window of opportunity there for an
attacker. So that's all, that's a summary of what I'd like to discuss or what the issues I found,
again, I'm not a file system expert, I don't know what would it take to do these changes in the
kernel, I've only seen this from a user perspective, and that's it, thank you.
Can you go back to the original slide, so tracking C time and M time changes, this is something that
Jeff Layton has worked on in the context of NFS, because they also want to track changes to files,
they have a need for this internally to NFS itself, I'm not completely sure how it works,
but we do have internally something which is called the iversion, which is the i-note version,
but we haven't really exposed this to user space, and the idea is that you get an updated iversion
every time, for example a data or metadata change occurs, so that could be thought about exposing
this to user space, but we weren't quite sure if we can have a consistent definition across
all file systems for this, but anyway you should probably talk to him about this specific stuff,
I think someone proposed listset get x-adder at system calls a while ago, and no one was really
opposed to adding those, though I kind of questioned the value of them a little bit,
my main gripe with them had been that the original proposal made it so that you can use
opaf file descriptors to set x-adders, which I think is just opaf file descriptors are limited,
and if we add ever more functionality to them, that you for example can set x-adders to an opaf
file descriptor, at some point defeats the purpose of having an opaf file descriptor.
It's for consistency, I mean you have it for the rest of it, you have it for ch-mode, for ch-own,
for u-time and so, it makes sense to also have it for x-hub, right?
Yeah sure, as I said I'm not really opposed to it, just a bit weird, because in a way that the
thing that I don't quite understand yet is if you have open-at or open-at2, and you have a file
descriptor, a starting point file descriptor, and then you want to back up, I don't know,
you want to extend the attributes further down the tree, then you could do an open-at,
open this file, and then pass that to fget get x-adder.
Well if there are workarounds there you can also go from proc-self and get the descriptor and resolve it.
Yeah and the thing is, the thing is what I'm saying is like a lot of these,
a lot of the newer stuff that we have in open-at2 which have lookup restrictions where you can,
for example, don't cross into another file system, known and so on, all of that stuff is not available
with, for fset x-adder and get x-adder and so on. But anyway, I'm not opposed to adding this,
if it's useful it would probably be easy to do. Yeah, I don't quite remember the IOC get set flags,
this is not exposed in static sets, I assume everything that we have in IOC get flags.
I don't remember, so the statics will tell you, because you also have an IOCPL for determining
if it's encrypted or not, which you cannot use or see or on Syslinks, Asimlinks because you cannot
use it. For the immutable, I don't remember, it has the, I remember that the immutable and they're
not damp, they are reported, are part of the statics, so you could get them with statics,
but how do you set them? You cannot set them in another way other than the IOCPL. So I was,
I thought that since we already have the x-adder interface for setting attributes, maybe we could
map those old attributes to some new extended attributes that set them through this way, so
that we have a common API for all of them instead of resorting to IOCPL and use these flag...
We probably need to talk about this a bit more because I don't understand what you mean by
mapping those two x-adders, but in general the x-adder interfaces, they're somewhat broken,
the complete API is somewhat broken, like if you, for example, if you set 1000 or 20,000 extended
attributes on a file, then LIST X-Adder won't even return them to you anymore, because it will tell
you, oh, it's limited to, I don't know, 64 kilobytes or less, and if you go over that, you can't list
them anymore, like the whole API is fucked, so I mean... Yes, but yeah, it's used for everything,
okay? I agree with you. It's even used for inline data, okay? X4 uses extended attributes to store
data in the, I know it itself, so yeah, I get it, but I need to preserve them, I need to preserve
both of them, so since this is what has come up with, let's at least, I don't know, at least bridge
the gap between the old one and the new one, I mean, in the same way I have immutable and
append, and I have to do the IOCTL, just give me a standardized extended attribute to do this,
so that I only have to use one API, and not, because with the IOCTL, you can, you should also mask
the flags that are not file system specific when you do it, and with the extended attributes, you can...
You should or you can? You should. When you read the flags, you mask those that are file
system specific, so that when you preserve them, you do not try to set a flag to a file system that
doesn't make sense of that file system, so yeah, it's a mess, so if we had a extended attribute
for wrapping this, we could, for example, get an error in this case, or it should be, we had, we had
one API for the whole thing, which to me, it would look much cleaner.
I don't know what would it take for copy file range or send, that's, or for send file to become an
IO during op. That probably, I just sent a patch to Yen, so I'm pretty sure he's happy to take this.
And I don't know what, if we had this flag, because config file range has a flags attribute
that's not being used right now, it's just empty, so if we had the flag there for, you know, preserving
holes, that would be great, because I wouldn't have to do all this back and forth to determine where
the hole is and preserve them. That would be great, I guess. I don't, I guess, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I,
I, I, I, I haven't seen the code, I don't know what would it take, that's why I wanted some feedback
on this, like, if this would break things, this would be too much to ask, I don't know.
So, um,
yeah, that's a approach, yeah, that's a good approach. It looks to me that this will be a lot easier
if there was some sort of generic, uh, API to dump, uh, tree, our SAP tree in the file system,
any file system implements that on its own, and then you get something generic,
and then there's something to restore that. So, with Hal, let's say, a system called that would
do the whole thing. Yeah, exactly. Because the file system knows better. Yes, but, I mean, they tried,
they are already trying to doing that, at least that's what I understood from the documentation,
with, um, uh, with the copy file range, at least for the data stuff. Yeah, but just for the data,
what I mean is you, it doesn't have the holes, but, so you say we could have, like,
something similar for the, for the whole attribute thing. Yeah, you give it a directory, and then
it, it passes from that, the entire file system, and gives you something with all the attributes,
holes, and whatever the file system supports, and then you can re-import that into another
file system, and maybe you add some filter to it so that it doesn't give you something that it
doesn't support in the other files that you want, or whatever. Currently, this filter is in a config
file on ETC, and user space needs to be... Yeah, but it's user space-based. There is not a registry
for all these attributes. That's one of the problems, right? I don't even know how many there are.
And the other thing is, perhaps, it will make more sense to, instead of doing APIs like copy
file range, to use the splice concept and implement it for pipes and sockets as well.
Send file does this internally. So, the previous one, send file, it uses, internally, it uses splice
for doing this in Kendo space. But it doesn't support the same kind of, like, going over holes and
that sort of thing. Yeah, you still need to come back, but that's why I was saying that, since the
new API is meant to be called file range, and it has a flag attribute there that we can use, maybe
we could introduce a flag for this. That would make more sense, because send file is already being
used, and it would break things we want to be about. Sorry, we're out of time. Okay? Thank you, everyone.